# A short distraction

While I am enjoying putting the DCSS win follower together I feel like
I could be learning, and writing, more TypeScript. As such it's time
to [Make A Lisp][] in TypeScript. Not because it hasn't been done before,
as it surely has countless times already, but because _I_ haven't done
it before. In TypeScript.

[Make A Lisp]: https://github.com/kanaka/mal/

# Making A Lisp

To begin with I'll take a branch off [master][] and gut the
existing [TypeScript implementation][]. That way I'm starting from a
reasonably blank slate without having to do too much finicky work with
shell scripts and `Makefile`s. However—I do want to use [deno][] and
the current implementation uses `node` and the [typescript package][]
so I'll need to do _some_ finicky work.

Firstly is `Makefile` trickery needed?

> If your implementation language is a compiled language, then you
> should also add a Makefile at the top level of your implementation
> directory.

I don't think so thanks to `deno` natively running TypeScript. Now we
just need to fix the `run` script file to run `deno`, nice and
straight forward:

```diff
-exec node $(dirname $0)/${STEP:-stepA_mal}.js "${@}"
+exec deno run -A $(dirname $0)/${STEP:-stepA_mal}.js "${@}"
```

Then I just need to implement the braindead simple `step0_repl.ts` and
I'll be on my way to making a Lisp. Just need a [readline][] library
... oh dear. This way surely lies madness. Let's start with a library
that speaks `readline` called [reedline_deno][] which looks to use
Rust's [reedline][]:

```
§ deno run --unstable -A step0_repl.ts 
Downloading https://github.com/sigmaSd/reedline-deno/releases/download/0.17.0/libreedline_rust_x86_64.dylib.dylib
error: Uncaught (in promise) Error: Could not find https://github.com/sigmaSd/reedline-deno/releases/download/0.17.0/libreedline_rust_x86_64.dylib.dylib
            throw new Error(`Could not find ${url}`);
                  ^
    at download (https://deno.land/x/plug@1.0.2/download.ts:254:19)
    at eventLoopTick (ext:core/01_core.js:181:11)
    at async Module.dlopen (https://deno.land/x/plug@1.0.2/mod.ts:155:25)
    at async Function.create (https://deno.land/x/reedline_deno@0.17.1/src/mod.ts:41:17)
    at async file:///Users/dbrook/dev/mal/impls/ts/step0_repl.ts:16:12
```

The `.dylib.dylib` extension in the error message doesn't bode well. A
quick look at the [GitHub issues][] for the library suggests this isn't
a problem others have faced so I'm going to commit to a tactical
retreat and roll my own.

Hang on a second, `deno` already provides a simple function for doing
exactly what I need! Thanks to [ADITYA KUMAR][] for his helpful
[StackOverflow answer][] that points to [prompt][]. Our REPL for `step0_repl`
looks like this:

```typescript
let line = prompt('user>')
while (line !== null) {
  console.log(rep(line));
  line = prompt('user>')
}
```

It may not have the user input affordances that you'd _want_ from a
REPL but the tests are now passing!

```
TEST RESULTS (for ../tests/step0_repl.mal):
    0: soft failing tests
    0: failing tests
   24: passing tests
   24: total tests
```

[master]: https://github.com/kanaka/mal/tree/master
[TypeScript implementation]: https://github.com/kanaka/mal/tree/master/impls/ts
[deno]: https://deno.land/
[typescript package]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/typescript
[readline]: https://www.gnu.org/software/readline/
[reedline_deno]: https://deno.land/x/reedline_deno@0.17.1
[reedline]: https://docs.rs/reedline/
[GitHub issues]: https://github.com/sigmaSd/reedline-deno/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed
[ADITYA KUMAR]: https://stackoverflow.com/users/7475145/aditya-kumar
[StackOverflow answer]: https://stackoverflow.com/a/66508618
[prompt]: https://deno.land/api@v1.39.4?s=prompt

# Step 2 - step1

The next step requires reading an input, parsing it and then printing
it back out again. It doesn't sound terribly onerous but this is
usually the point at which one _actually_ learns the implementation
language as you need to take some input and turn it into local
representations. So we're talking learning at least the local
abstractions, possibly some of the local type theory and likely
starting to create libraries rather than just scripts (as I have done
so far).

Let's begin: the [wording of step1][] takes a little unpacking but the
gist is we need some functions which take strings, split them up and
ultimately produce types in the Mal domain. So something like:

```typescript
// types.ts
export type MalType = {}

// reader.ts
import { MalType } from './types.ts'

export function read_str(input: string): MalType {
    return read_form(new Reader(tokenize(input)))
}

export function tokenize(input: string): Array<string> {
    return []
}

function read_form(r: Reader): MalType {
    return {}
}

class Reader {
    tokens: Array<string>;
    pos = 0;

    constructor(tokens: Array<string>) {
        this.tokens = tokens
    }
}

// printer.rs
import { MalType } from './types.ts'

export function pr_str(v: MalType): String {
    return ''
}
```

There we introduce the `MalType` which is will be the base type for
all other Mal values. Then we have a function—`read_str`—that will
take an input, tokenize it, feed that to a `Reader` which in turn is
consumed by `read_form` to produce the final `MalType`
instance. Lastly there's `pr_str` which takes a `MalType` and turns it
back into something fit for print i.e a `string`.

Now the `READ` & `PRINT` functions of `step1_read_print.ts` will, with the appropriate
imports, call the new `read_str` and `print_str` functions:

```typescript
function READ(s: string): MalType {
    return read_str(s)
}
function EVAL(v: MalType): MalType {
    return v
}
function PRINT(v: MalType): string {
    return pr_str(v)
}
```

Let's see how far that gets us:

```
$ make "test^ts^step1"
...
TEST RESULTS (for ../tests/step1_read_print.mal):
   19: soft failing tests
   97: failing tests
    1: passing tests
  117: total tests
```

It compiles and doesn't produce errors so that is certainly
progress. Now I'll just fill in those gaps.

# What I learnt about types in TypeScript

Let me jump into the future to describe the past as I couldn't
document this process as it happened :-

My implementation of the reader was relatively straightforward, I used
an earlier [Kotlin implementation][] of step1 to jog my memory and
speed things along. Its easy mix of functions and classes made it a
good match for TypeScript and the type systems, at a glance, _seem_ to
bear a resemblance.

This also meant I bunged in a bunch of types that seemed sensible to
me, and the compiler patiently nodded at, in `types.ts` and moved
along my merry way. Ah blissful ignorance …

At the point I go to reckon with those types in `pr_str` is when I
realise that my naive understanding of types in TypeScript was
flawed. Those initial types I created looked like this:

```typescript
// deno-lint-ignore no-empty-interface
export interface MalType {}

export type MalList = MalType & {
    values: Array<MalType>
}

// deno-lint-ignore no-empty-interface
export interface MalAtom extends MalType { }

export type MalSymbol = MalAtom & { sym: string }
export type MalNumber = MalAtom & { num: number }
```

And what I wanted to do was render the various types printable by
matching/dispatching based on type, rather like my initial Kotlin
implementation (and similarly [Rust implementation][]):

```kotlin
fun pr_str(v: MalType) : String {
    return when(v) {
        is MalList   -> {
            "(" + v.atoms.map { pr_str(it) }.joinToString(" ") + ")"
        }
        is MalNumber -> v.number.toString()
        is MalSymbol -> v.sym
        else -> ""
    }
}
```

So there I am, assuming types are first class values that are
addressable at runtime and I can deal with the squiggly reds in a
moment:

```typescript
import { MalType, MalList, MalSymbol, MalNumber } from './types.ts'

export function pr_str(v: MalType): string {
    switch(v) {
        case MalList:
            return "(" + v.values.map(pr_str).join(" ") + ")"
        case MalNumber:
            return v.num
        case MalSymbol:
            return v.sym
        default:
            throw "Unrecognised value type " + typeof v
    }
}
```

Let's see what they're about:

```
'MalList' only refers to a type, but is being used as a value here.deno-ts(2693)
Property 'values' does not exist on type 'MalType'.
  Property 'values' does not exist on type 'MalNumber'.deno-ts(2339)
'MalNumber' only refers to a type, but is being used as a value here.deno-ts(2693)
Property 'num' does not exist on type 'MalType'.
  Property 'num' does not exist on type 'MalList'.deno-ts(2339)
'MalSymbol' only refers to a type, but is being used as a value here.deno-ts(2693)
Property 'sym' does not exist on type 'MalType'.
  Property 'sym' does not exist on type 'MalList'.deno-ts(2339)
```

To the TypeScript aficianados I'm sure my error is apparent but here
is where the penny began to drop for me—types in TypeScript are not in
fact like types in Kotlin or Rust but something a little different.

In case the situation isn't apparent: I had _assumed_ that, being a
modern statically typed language, that types in TypeScript would in
turn be first class objects. This isn't the case and, upon reflecting
on the matter, it makes sense that they aren't first class objects.

To get to the heart of the matter let's firstly refer to the
[TypeScript Language Specification][] to understand get some insight
in to why this is the way it is:

> The TypeScript compiler performs only file-local transformations on TypeScript programs and does not re-order variables declared in TypeScript. This leads to JavaScript output that closely matches the TypeScript input. TypeScript does not transform variable names, making tractable the direct debugging of emitted JavaScript.

An implication we can derive from those statements is that whatever
type system exists in TypeScript it doesn't have any runtime component
in JavaScript which in turn means there isn't (obviously) a logical
way to represent types _in_ JavaScript.

Then if we look at [Understanding TypeScript][] in the **Design of
TypeScript** section we have it spelled out even more clearly:

> Full erasure: The types of a TypeScript program leave no trace in the JavaScript emitted by the compiler. There are no run-time representations of types, and hence no run-time type checking. Current dynamic techniques for “type checking” in JavaScript programs, such as checking for the presence of certain properties, or the values of certain strings, may not be perfect, but good enough.

This (latterly) has cemented my understanding of what types are _not_
but it was in implementing a functioning `pr_str`, with reference to
[other][] [approaches][] on type matching, that made me understand better what
types _are_ in TypeScript—they are structural types. Again I'm going
to quote from same section of that paper to elaborate:

> Structural types: The TypeScript type system is structural rather than nominal. Whilst structural type systems are common in formal descriptions of object-oriented languages [&#91;1&#93;][], most industrial mainstream languages, such as Java and C], are nominal. However, structural typing may be the only reasonable fit for JavaScript programming, where objects are often built from scratch (not from classes), and used purely based on their expected shape.

That is what I had intuited so it was nice to written down in a paper!
It also makes sense of the discussion around [discriminated unions][]
and why that is a normal and expected way of doing type
dispatch/discrimination in TypeScript—your types aren't their at
runtime so _should_ you need them then you need your objects to carry
that information with them.

And that's the story of my "entypement"^[2][#pun]^ of TypeScript! To
cut a long story short the types ended up looking like this:

```typescript
export type MalList = {
    type: 'list',
    values: Array<MalType>
}

export type MalSymbol = {
    type: 'symbol'
    value: string
}
export type MalNumber = {
    type: 'number'
    value: number
}

export type MalType = MalList | MalNumber | MalSymbol
```

With `pr_str` making use ofthe `type` property (which I'll admit,
having a property in your type to represent the type called "type", may
be a type too far) that code is now functioning and hopefully
idiomatic:

```typescript
import { MalType } from './types.ts'

export function pr_str(v: MalType): string {
    switch(v.type) {
        case 'list':
            return "(" + v.values.map(pr_str).join(" ") + ")"
        case 'number':
            return String(v.value)
        case 'symbol':
            return v.value
        default:
            throw "Unrecognised value type " + v
    }
}
```

[Kotlin implementation]: https://github.com/broquaint/mal/commit/5eb74c7f8d0a40dee8d76a389c63addd7230bd4c
[Rust implementation]: https://github.com/broquaint/mal/commit/e3d5f646d77d7aac2f475ef17d936773f77219ae#diff-0d8e474d1b9f5306eb90699ed5183f475cd2aa3c8ca7f5742741b3529005225d
[TypeScript specification]: https://github.com/Microsoft/TypeScript/blob/v1.8.10/doc/spec.md
[Understanding TypeScript]: https://users.soe.ucsc.edu/~abadi/Papers/FTS-submitted.pdf
[&#91;1&#93;]: http://lucacardelli.name/TheoryOfObjects.html
[other]: https://medium.com/technogise/type-safe-and-exhaustive-switch-statements-aka-pattern-matching-in-typescript-e3febd433a7a
[approaches]: https://www.andrekoenig.de/articles/pattern-matching-in-typescript
[discriminated unions]: https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/narrowing.html#discriminated-unions

# Something like a bug

Now that I have the tokenizing, reading and printing in place I can run the
tests and see that a number of them are passing but I'm getting this:

```
TEST: '(()())' -> ['',(() ())] -> FAIL (line 54):
    Expected : '.*\n\\(\\(\\)\\ \\(\\)\\)'
    Got      : '(()())\n(())'
```

That can be a little tricky to parse at a glance: the test is
expecting the input `(()())` to look the broadly same in output but my
implementation is producing `(())` which we can verify in its REPL
like so:

```
user> (()())
(())
user> ((1)(2))
((1))
```

My inital educated guess is that the reader stops processing a list on
the first `)` it encounters. Let's test that out:

```
user> (+ 2 (+ 3 4) 5)
(+ 2 (+ 3 4))
user> (+ (x 5 6) 7 8 9 (+ 10 11))
(+ (x 5 6))
```

Yep, that looks to be the case. Let's look at the list reading
function ^[1](#read_list)^:

```typescript
function read_list(r: Reader): MalList {
    const list : Array<MalType> = []
    while(r.peek() != ")") {
        list.push(read_form(r))
    }
    return { type: 'list', values: list }
}
```

So what should be happening is that while any given token isn't `)` we
attempt to read the next form. Which means given an input like `(+ foo bar)`
we'll see a call stack like this with annotate reader:

* `read_form({pos: 0, tokens: **(** + foo bar )}`
    * `read_list({pos: 1, tokens: ( **+** foo bar )})`
        * `read_form({pos: 1, tokens: ( **+** foo bar )})`
            * `read_atom({pos: 1, tokens: ( **+** foo bar )})`
        * `read_form({pos: 2, tokens: ( + **foo** bar )})`
            * `read_atom({pos: 2, tokens: ( + **foo** bar )})`
        * `read_form({pos: 3, tokens: ( + foo **bar** )})`
            * `read_atom({pos: 3, tokens: ( + foo **bar** )})`

Which leaves the reader in the state `read_atom({pos: 4, tokens:
( + foo bar **)** })` so when we `peek` at the next
token it's a `)` and so `read_list` returns a `MalList` with the
values `['+', 'foo', 'bar']`. So far so good. But when we introduce a list
within a list, e.g `(+ (foo) bar)`, the we a call stack like this:

* `read_form({pos: 0, tokens: **(** + ( foo ) bar )}`
    * `read_list({pos: 1, tokens: ( **+** ( foo ) bar )})`
        * `read_form({pos: 1, tokens: ( **+** ( foo ) bar )})`
            * `read_atom({pos: 1, tokens: ( **+** ( foo ) bar )})`
        * `read_form({pos: 2, tokens: ( + **(** foo ) bar )})`
            * `read_list({pos: 3, tokens: ( + ( **foo** ) bar )})`
                * `read_form({pos: 3, tokens: ( + ( **foo** ) bar )})`
                    * `read_atom({pos: 3, tokens: ( + ( **foo** ) bar )})`

Now the reader state is ``read_atom({pos: 4, tokens: ( + ( foo **)** bar })`
so we peek and see `)` which returns from the inner `read_list` then
the outer read list _also_ sees that `)` so returns and, because we
advance the reader through recursion, that is the—premature—end of the
form!

While something of a sticky wicket the solution to being stuck on
a `)` presents itself rather simply—move past the token! With this
simple change:

```diff
`@@ -32,2 +32,3 @@ function read_list(r: Reader): MalList {
     }
+    r.next() // Move past closing paren
     return { type: 'list', values: list }
```

The test now passes!
```
TEST: '(()())' -> ['',(() ())] -> SUCCESS
```

# In summary

I learnt a lot about TypeScript and why it is the way it is and I now
have the beginnings of a Mal implementation. This seems like a good
point to stop writing, reflect some more, and keep back another
day. Next time I will attempt the [deferrable aspects][] of Mal and, time
permitting, make a start on step2—the third step.

[deferrable aspects]: https://github.com/kanaka/mal/blob/master/process/guide.md#deferrable

# Footnotes

^name="#read_list" 1^ the real implementation has a call to `r.next()` at the
top of `read_list` to move past `(` but I've moved that into
`read_form` for, what I hope, is a simpler explanation.
^name="#pun" 2^ I will not defend this pun not because it's good but
because it is bad and so would be using the word "enlightenment" there
